iss#55935: Documents missing internal parameters and polishes 'Intern… (#79118)
ansible/ansible: docs/docsite/rst/dev_guide/developing_program_flow_modules.rst

------------------

Both :ref:`module_replacer` and :ref:`Ansiballz` send additional arguments to
the Ansible module beyond those which the user specified in the playbook. These
additional arguments are internal parameters that help implement global
Ansible features. Modules often do not need to know about these explicitly because
the features are implemented in :py:mod:`ansible.module_utils.basic`. However, certain
features need support from modules and some knowledge of the internal arguments is useful.

The internal arguments in this section are global. If you need to add a local internal argument to a custom module, create an action plugin for that specific module. See ``_original_basename`` in the `copy action plugin <https://github.com/ansible/ansible/blob/devel/lib/ansible/plugins/action/copy.py#L329>`_ for an example.

_ansible_no_log
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> Format: <bool>

Reviewer: in all our other docs we use `type:` instead of `format:`

Author: Ok, i will change it to: 

`Type: <bool>`

Sounds good?

Reviewer: you can drop the `< >`

.. note::
    ``no_log`` you specified in the ``argument_spec`` specification of a module is handled by a different mechanism.

_ansible_debug
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Format: <bool>

Operates verbose logging and logging of external commands that a module executes. If the module uses the :py:meth:`AnsibleModule.debug` function rather than the :py:meth:`AnsibleModule.log` function then the messages are only logged if you set the ``_ansible_debug`` argument to ``True``. To activate the setting, add the ``debug: True`` key to the :file:`ansible.cfg` configuration file. Alternatively, you can set the environment variable :envvar:`ANSIBLE_DEBUG`. To access ``_ansible_debug`` in a module, instantiate the ``AnsibleModule`` utility and access :attr:`AnsibleModule._debug`.

_ansible_diff
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Format: <bool>

> With this parameter you can configure your module to show a unified diff of changes that will be applied to the templated files. To activate the setting, use the ``--diff`` command-line option. To access ``_ansible_diff`` in a module, instantiate the ``AnsibleModule`` utility and access :attr:`AnsibleModule._diff`.

Reviewer: there is also the `diff` keyword, most setting are 'settable' in multple ways and at different scopes.

Author: You mean that the `diff` keyword is available for the `_ansible_diff` argument? Should we mention that keyword here with some description?

Reviewer: the keyword is already described in the keywords page, but my point is not only about this specific setting, most of these keys result from multiple levels of configuration from global to per play/role/taks/host, i would link to the source of the configuration (for example, remote_tmp configuration in shell plugins for _remote_tmp)

Reviewer: also, the config sources will already have more information like 'type', 'default', 'choices', etc as well as a description for what the configuration means.

Author: I found `{module_name, string_conversion_action, keep_remote_files}` in https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/reference_appendices/config.html#ansible-configuration-settings 

More info about `_ansible_remote_tmp` is here https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/collections/ansible/builtin/sh_shell.html#parameter-remote_tmp

Details about `_ansible_shell_executable` is here https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/user_guide/intro_inventory.html#ansible-shell-executable

Did you mean these pages as sources of the configuration? They looked good to me as they provided the kinds of information you mentioned in your comments.

However i couldnt find any configuration source for `_ansible_socket` and `_ansible_tmpdir`.

cc: @samccann, @oraNod, @acozine  in case you know where to find the config sources, your help would be greatly appreciated :-)

Reviewer 2: `_ansible_socket` is created in https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/reference_appendices/config.html#persistent-control-path-dir

`_ansible_tmpdir` is the connection plugin's shell's `tmpdir` attribute. It's set here https://github.com/ansible/ansible/blob/devel/lib/ansible/plugins/action/__init__.py#L503. Depending on the circumstance the tmp dir will be created in one of these: 
* [DEFAULT_LOCAL_TMP](https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/reference_appendices/config.html#default-local-tmp) 
*  [remote_tmp](https://github.com/ansible/ansible/blob/4d984613f5e16e205434cdf7290572e62b40bf62/lib/ansible/plugins/doc_fragments/shell_common.py#L12-L21) shell option
* [system_tmpdirs](https://github.com/ansible/ansible/blob/4d984613f5e16e205434cdf7290572e62b40bf62/lib/ansible/plugins/doc_fragments/shell_common.py#L35-L52) shell option

Reviewer 3: @bcoca @s-hertel - is this set of comments resolved by @JaroslavKlech recent changes here? Hard for me to tel...

Reviewer 2: @samccann Not for this specific option, but for some of the others. The keyword `diff` https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/reference_appendices/playbooks_keywords.html and configuration entry https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/reference_appendices/config.html#diff-always should be mentioned here.

Boolean. Turns more verbose logging on or off and turns on logging of
external commands that the module executes. If a module uses
:py:meth:`AnsibleModule.debug` rather than :py:meth:`AnsibleModule.log` then
the messages are only logged if ``_ansible_debug`` is set to ``True``.
To set, add ``debug: True`` to :file:`ansible.cfg` or set the environment
variable :envvar:`ANSIBLE_DEBUG`. To access in a module, instantiate an
``AnsibleModule`` and access :attr:`AnsibleModule._debug`.

_ansible_diff
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Format: <bool>

With this parameter you can configure your module to show a unified diff of changes that will be applied to the templated files. To activate the setting, use the ``--diff`` command-line option. To access ``_ansible_diff`` in a module, instantiate the ``AnsibleModule`` utility and access :attr:`AnsibleModule._diff`.

Boolean. If a module supports it, tells the module to show a unified diff of
changes to be made to templated files. To set, pass the ``--diff`` command line
option. To access in a module, instantiate an `AnsibleModule` and access
:attr:`AnsibleModule._diff`.

_ansible_verbosity
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> Unused. This value could be used for finer grained control over logging.

Reviewer: this would be an int reflecting  'verbosity level' (0 for none)

Author: Should we drop the word "unused" here and instead put there `Type: <int>` ?

Reviewer: yes, not sure why you think it is 'unused'

> Format: <list>

Reviewer: type: list
elements: strings

Author: Would it also be acceptable like this:

`Type: <list>`
`Elements: <strings>`

additional arguments are internal parameters that help implement global
Ansible features. Modules often do not need to know about these explicitly because
the features are implemented in :py:mod:`ansible.module_utils.basic`. However, certain
features need support from modules and some knowledge of the internal arguments is useful.

The internal arguments in this section are global. If you need to add a local internal argument to a custom module, create an action plugin for that specific module. See ``_original_basename`` in the `copy action plugin <https://github.com/ansible/ansible/blob/devel/lib/ansible/plugins/action/copy.py#L329>`_ for an example.

_ansible_no_log
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Type: ``bool``

Set to ``True`` whenever an argument in a task or play specifies ``no_log``. Any module that calls the :py:meth:`AnsibleModule.log` function handles this action automatically. If you have a module that implements its own logging then you need to check the value of ``_ansible_no_log``. To access ``_ansible_no_log`` in a module, instantiate the ``AnsibleModule`` utility and then check the value of :attr:`AnsibleModule.no_log`.

.. note::

>     ``no_log`` you specified in the ``argument_spec`` specification of a module is handled by a different mechanism.

Reviewer 2: Minor nit, but 'argument_spec specification' is redundant. I think the original wording read a little better here to me.

Author: I applied both suggestions.

_ansible_debug
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Type: ``bool``

> Operates verbose logging and logging of external commands that a module executes. If the module uses the :py:meth:`AnsibleModule.debug` function rather than the :py:meth:`AnsibleModule.log` function then the messages are only logged if you set the ``_ansible_debug`` argument to ``True``. To activate the setting, add the ``debug: True`` key to the :file:`ansible.cfg` configuration file. Alternatively, you can set the environment variable :envvar:`ANSIBLE_DEBUG`. To access ``_ansible_debug`` in a module, instantiate the ``AnsibleModule`` utility and access :attr:`AnsibleModule._debug`.

Reviewer 2: Instead of describing the environment variable and the ini entry, you could link to the config option https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/reference_appendices/config.html#default-debug which documents both.

_ansible_diff
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Type: ``bool``

With this parameter you can configure your module to show a unified diff of changes that will be applied to the templated files. To activate the setting, use the ``--diff`` command-line option. To access ``_ansible_diff`` in a module, instantiate the ``AnsibleModule`` utility and access :attr:`AnsibleModule._diff`.

_ansible_verbosity
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Type: ``int``

You can use this argument to control the level (0 for none) of verbosity in logging. 

_ansible_selinux_special_fs
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Type: ``list``
Elements: ``strings``

> This argument provides modules with the names of file systems which should have a special SELinux context. They are used by the ``AnsibleModule`` methods which operate on files (changing attributes, moving, and copying). To set, add a comma-separated string of file system names in the :file:`ansible.cfg` configuration file:

Reviewer 2: There's an environment variable as well. You could link the corresponding config option here https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/reference_appendices/config.html#default-selinux-special-fs

.. code-block:: ini

  # ansible.cfg
  [selinux]
  special_context_filesystems=nfs,vboxsf,fuse,ramfs,vfat

Most modules can use the built-in ``AnsibleModule`` methods to manipulate files. To access in a module that needs to know about these special context file systems, instantiate ``AnsibleModule`` and examine the list in :attr:`AnsibleModule._selinux_special_fs`.

This argument replaces :attr:`ansible.module_utils.basic.SELINUX_SPECIAL_FS` from :ref:`module_replacer`. In the module replacer framework the argument was formatted as a comma-separated string of file system names. Under the Ansiballz framework it is a list.

.. versionadded:: 2.1

_ansible_syslog_facility
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> This argument controls which syslog facility the module logs to. To set, change the ``syslog_facility`` value in the :file:`ansible.cfg` configuration file. Most modules should just use the :meth:`AnsibleModule.log` function which will then make use of this. If a module has to use this on its own, it should instantiate the ``AnsibleModule`` method and then retrieve the name of the syslog facility from :attr:`AnsibleModule._syslog_facility`. The Ansiballz code is less elegant than the :ref:`module_replacer` code:

Reviewer 2: Instead of mentioning one way to set the syslog facility using the ansible.cfg file, this would be another good place to reference the config option instead https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/reference_appendices/config.html#default-syslog-facility since it is more comprehensive and the documentation won't become out of sync as easily.

Reviewer 2: I think "To set, change the ``syslog_facility`` value in the :file:`ansible.cfg` configuration file." should be removed. Listing individual ways to set these internal parameters means we need to maintain those here and in the config file. I'm not going to comment on each internal parameter, but this is directed at any internal parameter still listing individual ways to set it (besides keywords, as there isn't a way to link to an individual playbook keyword, that I know of).

It's difficult to keep developer documentation in sync, because people already familiar with the infrastructure aren't regularly reading it. Keeping these explanations general and pointing to the source of truth will let this page stay accurate and complete more easily.

Author: Ok, i attempted to remove those individual ways. Hopefully, I covered all.

_ansible_socket
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
This argument provides modules with a socket for persistent connections. The argument is created using the :ref:`PERSISTENT_CONTROL_PATH_DIR` configuration option.

_ansible_shell_executable
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Type: ``bool``

This argument ensures that modules use the designated shell executable. For more details, see the :ref:`ansible_shell_executable` remote host environment parameter.

_ansible_tmpdir
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Type: ``str``

This argument provides instructions to modules that all commands must use the designated temporary directory, if created.

You can configure a part of this argument such as a root path. However, based on the circumstances the end directory is generated randomly for each task, or host in one of these:

* :ref:`DEFAULT_LOCAL_TMP`
* `remote_tmp <https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/collections/ansible/builtin/sh_shell.html#parameter-remote_tmp>`_
* `system_tmpdirs <https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/collections/ansible/builtin/sh_shell.html#parameter-system_tmpdirs>`_

> As a result, using the ``ansible.cfg`` configuration file to activate or customize this setting will not guarantee that you control the full value.

Reviewer 2: There's a public interface that should probably be recommend using over either of the internal tmp dir parameters: https://github.com/ansible/ansible/blob/devel/lib/ansible/module_utils/basic.py#L538.

Mentioning that the tmp dir is randomized is helpful, but it probably doesn't need to be the focus. Maybe this section could be modified along the lines of:

```
The temporary directory designated by the action plugin. Modules should access this parameter by using the public ``tmpdir`` property, which will create a temporary directory if the action plugin didn't set the parameter.

The directory name is generated randomly, and the the root of the directory is determined by one of these:

... links to config options ...
```

_ansible_remote_tmp
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> This argument ensures that modules send through the ``remote_tmp`` value if they need to create their own. For more details, see the `remote_tmp <https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/collections/ansible/builtin/sh_shell.html#parameter-remote_tmp>`_ parameter of the shell plugin.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The module's ``tmpdir`` property creates a randomized directory name in this directory if the action plugin didn't set ``_ansible_tmpdir``. For more details, see the `remote_tmp <https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/collections/ansible/builtin/sh_shell.html#parameter-remote_tmp>`_ parameter of the shell plugin.
```

.. versionadded:: 2.1

_ansible_version
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This argument passes the version of Ansible to the module. To access it, a module should instantiate the ``AnsibleModule`` method and then retrieve the version from :attr:`AnsibleModule.ansible_version`. This replaces :attr:`ansible.module_utils.basic.ANSIBLE_VERSION` from :ref:`module_replacer`.

.. versionadded:: 2.1

_ansible_module_name
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Format: <str>

> This argument passes the information to modules about their name.

Reviewer: this will be one of the few exceptions to what i mention above with configurations, this is a hardcoded internal. the same with _ansible_version above.

Author: The `Format / Type` can stay here?

_ansible_string_conversion_action
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
This argument provides instructions about what modules should do after the values of the user-specified module parameters are converted to strings.

_ansible_keep_remote_files
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Format: <bool>

This argument provides instructions that modules must be ready if they need to keep the remote files.

_ansible_socket
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
This argument provides modules with a socket for persistent connections.

_ansible_shell_executable
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Format: <bool>

This argument ensures that modules use the designated shell executable.

_ansible_tmpdir
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Format: <str>

> This argument provides instructions to modules that all commands must use the designated temporary directory, if created.

Reviewer: this is somewhat of a mix, part of it is configurable (root path) but the end directory is generated randomly for each task/host so while you can point at a config, ti won't control the full value.

.. versionadded:: 2.1

_ansible_version
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This argument passes the version of Ansible to the module. To access it, a module should instantiate the ``AnsibleModule`` method and then retrieve the version from :attr:`AnsibleModule.ansible_version`. This replaces :attr:`ansible.module_utils.basic.ANSIBLE_VERSION` from :ref:`module_replacer`.

.. versionadded:: 2.1

_ansible_module_name
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Type: ``str``

> This argument passes the information to modules about their name. For more details see, the environment variable :ref:`DEFAULT_MODULE_NAME`.

Reviewer 2: `DEFAULT_MODULE_NAME` is a configuration option, not an environment variable, same for all the following references too. Config options might include environment variables, but also ini entries, variables, and cli options.
